Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to delete the
maximum element from a
Max Heap
In the previous videos we discussed about heaps and how
to construct a heap from an array that is we
learn the Heapify function
So the procedure to remove the max element in the
heap is first heapify the array that arranges all the
elements based on the max heap property that we have discussed
in the previous video at the end of this process
the largest element will be present in the root
of the complete tree
In other words it will be present in the array
index zero
Next we have to swap the first and last elements
of the array
Now the largest element will be present at the end
of the array and now we can remove the last element
by reducing the array size and after removal of this element
we have to check the max heap property of index zero
and if it is not correctly satisfied swap and continue
the heapify process here the heap property is not
satisfied
So we have to heapify the tree
So this is how we can delete the maximum
element in a Max heap
So the algorithm is heapify
the array swap the first and last elements reduce
the array size by one check heap property from index
zero and arrange it accordingly
And then the deletion is done
So now let us see how the code works
We have the function delete Max to delete the maximum
element
So as we said the first step is to swap
first and last elements so swap arr of Zero and
arr of size
Now the maximum element is at the last position
Now let us print the maximum element that is
arr of size and we will get Max equal
to 80
Printed on the screen now set size equel to size
minus one so that the last index removed from the array
now the maximum element is deleted from the heap
Now we have to check if the heap property is
violated by this deletion So pass the index zero to heapify
function along with the array and its size so
in Heapify the index equal to zero and
size equal to five and it is not equal to
six as we Decrement it earlier in the Delete
Max function
Now let us find the left and right Children of node
at this index that is zero
so left equal to two*index plus one that
is two*zero plus one which is equal to
one and right equal to left
plus one that is two
And here we are assuming that this sub tree satisfies
the heap property
So keep Max and Index at the same position
And if any child is greater than parent we will
update Max
And finally if Max and index are different we have to
perform swap operation
The first check if left child is greater than this
node
So we have if left less than or equal to
size and arr of left greater than arr of Max
and we have one less than size
But 30 is not greater than 50
So this if fails here now check if right child
is greater than Max
So we have
If right less than or equal to size and arr
of right greater than arr of Max and we have
two less than size and 60 greater than 50
So the right child 60 is greater than the current
max value which is 50
So update max and we got max equal to right
That is two
And see Now we have the maximum value of this
sub tree at Max now Check If Max was updated
that is max was initially set to index now check
If Max and Index are the same and Max equal to
two and index equal to zero now so it is
not the same
So if conditions is true so swap the elements at
Max and Index that is 60 and 50 are swapped
Now the maximum element is at the root position
Again we need to check for the max heap property of
this swapped index
So call heapify again by passing array the max and
size
So here Index equal to two and Size equal to
five
Let us first find the left and right Children of
node at this index so left equal to two*
index plus one that is two*two plus one
which is five and right equal to left plus one
which is six and said Max equal to index
Now let us find the maximum value in this sub
tree
So Check if left less than or equal to size
and arr of left greater than arr of Max
left five is equal to size and arr of left
40 is not greater than arr of Max 50
So this if fails here now check the right child
We have right six not less than or equal to
size
So this if also fails now check
If Max was updated and it was not so no
need to rearrange and we can understand that now the
heap is perfect so that is how we can delete
The maximum element of a heap now let us delete
the maximum element again from this result in heap
So as we said the first step is to swap
first and last elements swap arr of zero and arr of
size that is 60 and 40 now
The maximum elements 60 is at the
Last position
So let us print the maximum element which is arr of size
and we will get Max equal to 60
Print around this screen now said size equal to size
minus one to reduce the array size by one
so size equal to four now
Now the maximum element is deleted from the heap
Now we have to check if the heap property was
violated by this deletion so pass index 0 to
Heapify function along with the array and size so in
heapify the index is equal to zero and
size is equal to four
Let us first find the left and right Children of
the node at this index so left equal to
two*index plus one that is two*zero plus
one which is one and right equal to left plus
one that is two
And as we said we are assuming that this sub
tree satisfies the heap property So we will keep Max
and index at the same position
So now Max equal to zero now check if left
child is greater than this node So we have if
left less than or equal to size and arr of
left greater than arr of Max And we have one
less than size But 30 is not greater than 40
So if fails here and let us check If right
child is greater than Max So we have if right less than
or equal to size and arr of right greater than arr
of Max and we have two less than size and
50 greater than 40
So the right child 50 is greater than Parent 40
So update max and we got max equal to right
That is two
And see Now we have the maximum value of this
sub tree at Max now Check If Max was updated
that is
Max was initially said to index now check
If Max and index are different and it is so
if is true so swap elements it Max and Index
and the maximum element is now at the root position
Again we need to check for the max heap property of
the swapped Index
So call heapify
again by passing the array max and size and here
index equal to two and size equal to four
Let us first find the left and right Children of
the nodee at this index that is two so left
equal to two*index plus one that is
two*two plus one which is five and right equal
to left plus one which will be six and set
max equal to index
That is two now check if left and right child
greater than this node So we have if left less
than or equal to size
an arr of left greater than arr of Max but left
five is not less than or equal to size
So this if fails here now check the right child
We have right six not less than or equal to
size
So again this if fails now check If Max was
updated but it was not so
There is no need to rearrange the node and we
can understand that the heap is now perfect
So this is how we should remove the maximum of
minimum element from the heap
So first we have to swap the first and last
elements
Then we can reduce the size of array by one
so that the maximum element is deleted
Then we have to heapify the tree